213:Productivity growth in the nonfarm business sector slowed in the first quarter while hourly compensation continued up at the same pace as last year,
215:pushing unit labor costs up at a 3.8 percent annual rate following an increase of 2.0 percent last year. Revisions to the first quarter could bring the productivity data more in line with last year's numbers. The employment cost index for total compensation rose by a modest 0.7 percent for the 3 months ending in March, or at a 2.7 percent annual rate. This followed a jump of 1.0 percent for the 3 months ending in December. The index has increased by 3.3 percent over the latest 12 months, as wages and salaries advanced by 3.7 percent while benefit costs rose by only 2.2 percent.
251:Nonfarm productivity and unit labor costs
253:Nonfarm business productivity (real output per hour worked) rose at an annual rate of 0.2 percent in the first quarter, much slower than the 1.4 percent pace registered in the fourth quarter. However, first-quarter results are preliminary and partially reflect statistical complications. Revisions later in the year could boost the first-quarter figure. Productivity growth over the past 2 years averaged 1.9 percent, a marked improvement over the prior 3 years, when productivity was almost flat. Trend productivity growth is estimated to be slightly higher than 1.0 percent annually.
255:Hourly compensation costs in the nonfarm business sector grew at a 4.1 percent annual rate in the first 3 months of 1998, following a rapid 5.2 percent increase in the final quarter of last year. Labor costs per unit of output in this sector, which combine the effects of both compensation and productivity, were up at a 3.8 percent annual rate, the same as in the previous quarter. The two latest quarterly increases in unit labor costs are well above the 2.0 percent pace registered during all of 1997.
257:Productivity in manufacturing edged up by 0.5 percent at an annual rate in the first quarter after advancing 4.3 percent in the fourth quarter. The small first-quarter increase primarily reflected a sharp deceleration in factory output growth, although factory work hours also grew at a slower pace in the first quarter. Unit labor costs in manufacturing jumped up by 2.3 percent at an annual rate, but over the past four quarters were down 0.3 percent.
